---
layout: post
title: "Some thoughts on names"
date: 2015-11-29
---

In between a rehearsal and a concert today I’ve been attempting to gather my thoughts on names and how they’re used in the literature relating to Cornish and Breton.

## Names of languages

Breton has mostly sorted itself out orthographically these days, certainly in comparison with Cornish, and we can usually call it *brezhoneg* in Breton or *Breton* in French or English (although the English pronunciation of the word can be interesting—I and apparently most Celticists pronounce it in an anglicised way, /ˈbɹɛtən/, but I’ve heard Frenchists pronounce it the French way, /bʁəˈtõ/, even when speaking English). Barère (1794) calls it “bas-breton”, with the ostensible factually correct meaning of *the Breton of Basse-Bretagne*, but this is somewhat tautological in that the area Basse-Bretagne is itself defined as the territory in which the Breton language is spoken. Using the term “bas-breton” also had the helpful side-effect for Barère of emphasising the apparently primitive quality of the language, fitting in well with his ideology of *une langue, une nation*.

Names for Cornish are somewhat more complicated: not particularly so in English, where we mostly get on with calling it by its English name. Harasta (2013) departs from this in referring to it exclusively as Kernewek, “both to respectfully mark it as a language with the right to name itself and to differentiate it from the English-language adjective “Cornish”, which we will see below is a highly contested political category” (Harasta, 2013, p. 1). I would dispute this decision for three reasons. Firstly, *Kernewek* is by no means the only Cornish-language name for Cornish. Prior to the creation of the Standard Written Form, various forms of the language used different names, including *Kernewek*, but also *Kernowek*, *Kernuack*, *Curnoack* and probably others as well. Of course, we should be seizing the opportunity that the SWF has given us to simplify our list of potential names for the language, but even the official SWF glossary permits *Kernowek* as a Late Cornish variant of Middle Cornish-based *Kernewek*. In choosing Kernewek, Harasta is perhaps unintentionally aligning himself with Middle Cornish, making the sort of political statement that he seems to be trying to avoid.

*[a Late Cornish variant]: correction 2018: MC and LC forms are of course, technically, on equal footing in the SWF …

I’d also query Harasta’s point that a language has a “right to name itself”. Clearly any language will have its own name *in that language*, but that doesn’t mean we should use that name when we’re speaking about it in other languages. If Harasta’s thesis had been written in Cornish, it would have made sense for him to refer to the language as *Kernewek* (or *Kernowek*), but as it’s in English, it seems slightly incongruous. You wouldn’t expect to read an English-language thesis about the French language and find it consistently referred to as *français*. Significantly, the fact that Cornwall itself has names in various languages is used by Saltern (2011, p. 19) as an argument in favour of the legitimacy of a Cornish national identity: “unlike Cornwall, no English county has its own name in over 30 different languages of the world”.

My third issue with Harasta’s reasoning here is his assertion that the word *Cornish* refers to “a highly contested political category”. Yes, there are complications surrounding the definition of Cornish identity and how much political significance it really has, but the same can be said for most names of languages, as they usually also refer to groups of people: I may not want to be called English, but I can hardly deny that I speak the language called English. *Speakers of language X* isn’t a group that equates to *people of nationality X* or *people of ethnic group X* or anything of that kind. The name of the language is separate from any political concerns about the status of the people.

## Names of language varieties

There are four varieties of written Breton that have been at least moderately well-used over the twentieth century:

* KLT/unvan
* surunifiée/peurunvan/KLTG/KLTGw/ZH/zedacheg/zedachek/Unified Breton
* falc’huneg/falhuneg/universitaire/OU/skolveurieg
* etrerannyezhel/interdialectale/assimileg

From the list it’s pretty obvious that each variety goes by a large number of names. It’s easy to know which name corresponds with which orthography if you know a bit about the aims and characteristics of each one, but for people new to Breton it’s probably a bit confusing. The high quantity of names is of course exacerbated by the fact that the materials I find them in may be in either English or French, which means that the names themselves come in Breton, French or (less commonly) English according to the whims of the author. Everson’s use of “Unified Breton” (Everson, 2011, p. 67) is something I find particularly interesting given that in Breton and French that orthography is referred to as *peur*unvan or *sur*unifiée: the earlier KLT orthography was considered unified at the time of its creation, and the later KLTG was therefore effectively *super*unified, but Everson chooses not to make this point, instead, debatably, aligning KLT with Unified Cornish (on which more shortly), when we consider that Everson’s readers are English speakers and somewhat likely to have knowledge of Cornish.

The name of the *falc’huneg* orthography is spelt in two ways owing to the fact that in *falc’huneg* itself, it would be written *falhuneg*, although the former is seen more often as KLTG has largely won out in publications on Breton. Brekilien (1976, p. 91), in one of a number of remarks made slightly alarming by their tendency towards the emotional, responds to this fact with “ô paradoxe!”—I think this is a bit over the top.

As for Cornish, the different varieties don’t tend to have so many different names, although here I’m obviously not encountering them in any languages other than Cornish and English. Bock and Bruch (2008) sensibly divide the spoken forms of revived Cornish into Revived Middle Cornish, Revived Late Cornish and Tudor Cornish (I’m not sure why this one isn’t *Revived* Tudor Cornish, however). These can be subdivided so that RMC consists of Kernewek Kemmyn and Unified Cornish, TC mostly of Unified Cornish Revised and RLC of Late/Modern Cornish in its various forms.

Two interesting points arise from this. The first is the classification of “Unified Cornish”: this was the first standardised orthography of revived Cornish, and it’s revealing to note that in the original publications where this orthography was used, it isn’t quite given this name. Nance (1952, vii) refers merely to “Middle Cornish … in unified form”. A little later (Nance, 1955, v) he mentions the “unified spelling”, which is a bit closer to the term “Unified Cornish”, but still doesn’t use the initial capital letters employed by later writers. By 1974, Ellis is talking of “Unified Cornish” (Ellis, 1974, p. 160). I would suggest that this shift indicates that by this point this form of the language had come to be perceived as a strictly defined and somewhat politicised entity, easier to conceptualise and contest, and paving the way for the work of people such as Ken George, the creator of Kernewek Kemmyn. Since the split in Revived Cornish where Kemmyn was instrumental, “Unified Cornish” has become one of a number of opposing varieties, but the way Nance writes about it suggests that he doesn’t see it as a variety at all, just as a way of spelling things in a consistent manner.

The second point is the name *Kernewek Kemmyn*. The only place I have ever seen the English translation of this name—“Common Cornish”—used is in surveys of the Cornish language aimed towards linguists without specialist knowledge of it; within the revivalist community, it’s always called Kernewek Kemmyn. And in English, other varieties of the language are almost exclusively referred to their English names. So why is Kemmyn the only variety given this treatment? I anticipate this being something to do with the nature of the ideologies at play among the Kemmyn group, which brings me to the final category.

## Names of people

The evidence suggests that if a Cornish speaker changes their name to a more Cornish-sounding version, they’re probably a Kemmyn user. Harasta (2013) goes into some detail about the trajectory of the variously-named John King/Yowann Byghan; there’s also Jori Ansell and Rhisiart Tal-e-bot, and almost certainly others whom I have forgotten about or am yet to discover. It seems that Kemmyn users are often more likely to invest their whole lives in the Cornish revival, in contrast with users of other forms who may have a less personal, more academic interest in the language: Payton (2000, p. 116) certainly suggests that academics are more likely to avoid Kemmyn and choose to advocate Late Cornish or Unified Cornish Revised instead.

A good number of Breton activists in the early- to mid-twentieth century also made conscious decisions to use more explicitly Breton names. The most well-known of these is Roparz Hemon, who was born Louis Némo, and whose 1964 Breton-French dictionary (one of many) bears the inscription “© L. Nemo” on the title page. It would be interesting to identify more Breton activists who changed their names in this way, and to see if there appear to be any common factors relating to how they used Breton; doing so would probably give us some information about language and identity within the Breton revival movement, which could be corroborated with the data we have on the Cornish equivalent.

## References

Barère, B. (1794). *Rapport du comité de salut public* (Online). Available at <http://www.axl.cefan.ulaval.ca/francophonie/barere-rapport.htm> (Accessed 02 October 2015).

Bock, A. and Bruch, B. (2008). *An outline of the standard written form of Cornish*. Truro: Cornish Language Partnership.

Ellis, P. B. (1974). *The Cornish language and its literature*. London: Routledge.

Everson, M. (2011). *Breton grammar*. 3rd edn. Westport: Evertype.

Harasta, J. O. (2013). *In search of a single voice: The politics of form, use and belief in the Kernewek language*. PhD thesis, Syracuse University.

Hemon, R. (1964). *Dictionnaire breton-français*. 3rd edn. Brest: Al Liamm.

Nance, R. M. (1952). *An English-Cornish dictionary*. Marazion: The Federation of Old Cornwall Societies.

Nance, R. M. (1955). *A Cornish-English dictionary*. Marazion: The Federation of Old Cornwall Societies.

Payton, P. (2000). Cornish. In G. Price (Ed.), *Languages in Britain and Ireland*, pp 109–119. Oxford: Blackwell.

Saltern, I. (2011). *Cornish national minority report 2*. (Unpublished paper). Available at <http://celticcouncil.org.au/cornish/nsw/merlib/Cornish_Minority_Report_Two.pdf> [Accessed 8th October 2015]
