---
layout: post
title: "“Cornish Studies” and Cornish language studies"
date: 2015-12-28
---

This week I’ve been looking at the journal *Cornish Studies*, which has published research carried out in various Cornwall-related domains since 1973. The journal is produced by the [Institute of Cornish Studies](http://humanities.exeter.ac.uk/history/research/centres/ics/), part of the University of Exeter (although always based in Cornwall), and its first series was published from 1973 to 1987, while Charles Thomas, being the first director of the Institute, held the position of editor. Issues in this first series of *Cornish Studie*s are all bound in a light blue cardboard cover, all show the same picture of the original Institute building, and all bear the title in both Cornish and English: “Cornish Studies / Journal of the Institute of Cornish Studies / Lyver-termyn an Fundyans rak Studhyans Kernewek / Studhyansow Kernewek”.

After Charles Thomas retired from his position, *Cornish Studies* vanished for a while until its reappearance in 1993, the Institute now under the directorship of Philip Payton. For some reason, Payton chose to resurrect *Cornish Studies* as a series of edited volumes rather than a journal: each edition now had the physical appearance of a medium-sized paperback, an ISBN, and a stated association with University of Exeter Press. Additionally, the Cornish title was dropped from the cover: including it would by this time have entailed the choice of an orthography, and so would presumably have been too difficult to do without seeming to pick sides.

The second series of *Cornish Studies* ended in 2013 on Payton’s retirement, and recently the first volume of a third series has appeared under the editorship of Garry Tregidga, the Institute’s current director. Like the second series, the third seems not to be a journal but rather a group of edited volumes, although oddly, it’s no longer published by University of Exeter Press, but directly by the Institute itself.

## Studies of Cornish

I’ve seen the Institute of Cornish Studies criticised for its attitude to the revived forms of Cornish, with the accusation that it has been more sympathetic towards proponents of Unified Cornish (Revised) and Late (or Modern) Cornish than towards supporters of the other principal variety of Cornish, Kernewek Kemmyn—which has in fact gained a reputation for being disliked by academics in general. So does *Cornish Studies* give any indications of this kind of attitude? Unfortunately, we lose evidence from the early stages of the orthography debate, as this began to get going in the late eighties, during the hiatus in *Cornish Studies*’ publication. The first series therefore largely dates from a time when Unified Cornish went unchallenged; articles on the Cornish language from this time tend to be restricted to studies of manuscripts in traditional (i.e. pre-revival) Cornish, although two of interest are “How many people spoke Cornish traditionally?” in issue 14, written by Ken George, who was at that time gaining importance in the Cornish language movement as the architect of Kernewek Kemmyn, and Myrna Combellack’s “Twelve years’ progress in Unified Cornish, 1967 to 1979” in issue 6, which gives an impression of the state of the revival before its orthographical basis had come into question. There’s also a pleasing number of articles on the Cornish dialect of English, which tends to get sidelined later on as the debate over Cornish itself becomes more intense.

By the time of *Cornish Studies*’ own revival, the former dominance of Unified Cornish is long lost and the problematisation of the Cornish language revival is reflected in the greater number of articles relating to it, while this change of focus also indicates the more modern interests of the Institute’s staff after Charles Thomas’ retirement. Several of these are book reviews where supporters of certain varieties criticise the publications of their opponents: Michael Everson’s “‘An event of great signicance’ (sic): A review of George’s *Gerlyver kres*” in *Cornish Studies: Seven* is particularly entertaining. It’s true that these review articles tend to be written by supporters of Unified and Late Cornish rather than Kernewek Kemmyn; early in the series, a defence of Late Cornish in *Cornish Studies: Two* is responded to by Ken George in the following volume, but other articles tend to come from the Unified and Late Cornish factions. As for those dealing with traditional Cornish, quite a few are written by Nicholas Williams, the creator of Unified Cornish Revised and revived Cornish’s foremost defender of the manuscript tradition; one could certainly argue that his ideas on revived Cornish are given more academic credibility by the Institute’s promotion of his work on the traditional language, and at times he uses space in these articles refuting Ken George’s work.

If we are to go by what is published in *Cornish Studies*, it does therefore seem that critics of the Institute of Cornish Studies are correct in suggesting that they are less favourable towards Kernewek Kemmyn than towards other varieties. And, indeed, this is symptomatic of a general distrust of Kemmyn on the part of academia, as exemplified also by academic linguists unaffiliated with the Institute, such as Glanville Price and Jon Mills, both of whom contributed to the second series of *Cornish Studies* in volumes *Six* and *Seven* respectively. However, *Cornish Studies* also permits less biased contributions giving greater context on the revival, such as Kenneth McKinnon’s “Cornish at its millennium: An independent study of the language undertaken in 2000” (*Ten*) and “‘As Cornish as possible’—‘Not an outcast anymore’: Speakers’ and learners’ opinions on Cornish” (*Twelve*), several articles on the ideologies at play among early revivalists (*passim*), and Bernard Deacon’s “Language revival and language debate: Modernity and postmodernity” (*Four*), which questions the validity of the notion of “authentic Cornish”, at which revivalists from all camps explicitly aim. When so much literature on the Cornish revival is necessarily tainted by personal preference, such articles are particularly valuable.
